Welcome, my friend.
Glad you are joining us for
this very first session.
I am really looking forward
to our discussion today.
All right.
Today we are tackling a very
important topic, direction, sense.
It's like having your own internal
compass, but for competitive exams,
concept, explanation, direction, sense is
a fundamental part of reasoning ability.
It tests how well you understand
directions, distances, and where things
are positioned relative to each other.
Essentially, you visualize movements
and locations based on given
information to master this, a
clear grasp of basic directions and
turns work is absolutely essential.
First, let's talk about basic directions.
There are four primary or cardinal
directions, north, south, east, and west.
North is typically at the top of your
mental map south, at the bottom, east
to your right, and west to your left.
Now understanding turns is crucial
for solving direction sense problems.
A right turn means you are
turning 90 degrees clockwise
from your current direction.
For example, if you are facing north and
take a right turn, you will face east.
A left turn means turning 90 degrees,
anti-clockwise or counter-clockwise.
So if you are facing north and take
a left turn, you will face west.
Remember, clockwise is
the way clock hands move.
Anti-clockwise is the opposite.
Real world relevance.
Now, why is this important
for an S-B-I-P-O?
Direction?
Sense isn't just theory.
It directly relates to practical
banking operations and daily life.
A probationary officer might
need to quickly understand and
give directions to a new branch,
navigate complex office layouts, or
even interpret geographical data.
The ability to visualize and process
spatial information efficiently
is a valuable skill for problem
solving and effective decision
making in a dynamic work environment.
It's truly practical breakdown
of question types based on past
exam patterns, direction sense.
Questions for the S-B-I-P-O exam generally
fall into these categories finding.
The final direction makes up
approximately 30% of questions.
These ask where someone is facing
or moving after a series of turns.
Finding the distance accounts for
about 25% requiring calculation
of total distance covered or
straight line distance finding.
The relative direction is around
20%, asking for the direction of
one point relative to another.
Finding the shortest distance comprises
about 15% often requiring the Ian theorem.
And finally, shadow based questions
around 10% involve determining directions
based on shadow positions during sun,
risi or sunset formulas, plus tricks
time for some handy formulas and tricks.
The Raz Theorem is your
friend for shortest distance
in right angled triangles.
If A and B are perpendicular sides, and
C is the high use, then C equals the
square root of A squared plus B squared
for net displacement track north, south,
and east west movements separately.
For example, five meters north,
then two meters south, gives
a net of three meters north.
Four right divided by left turns.
Remember, a right turn
is 90 degrees clockwise.
A left turn is 90 degrees anti-clockwise,
two consecutive right turns, or
two consecutive left turns mean
facing the opposite direction.
Four consecutive turns of the same kind
bring you back to the original direction.
The shadow rule is simple.
Risi East means shadow falls West.
Sunset West means Shadow falls east.
If a person's shadow is to their
right, they face north in the
morning or south in the evening.
If to their left, they face south in
the morning or north in the evening.
Methods of solving how do we solve these?
First, the diagrammatic method.
Draw a clear diagram from
a central starting point.
Mark each movement with lines and arrows
indicating direction and distance.
Ensure right angels for turns, determine
the final position and reduce your answer.
Second, the coordinate system method,
assign your starting point as zero.
Zero North is positive.
Y South negative Y East is
positive X West, negative X update
coordinates for each movement.
Final coordinates give relative
position, which you can use
for distance or direction.
Third, the direction tracking
method is useful for just
finding the final direction.
Keep track of your current direction,
rotating 90 degrees clockwise for right
turns and anti-clockwise for left turns.
Shortcuts plus smart techniques.
Let's talk about some quick tips
for net displacement calculation.
Simplify by calculating total North,
south and east West movements separately
for relative direction without drawing.
Visualize.
If B is north of A and C is east
of B, then C is northeast of a.
Visualizing turns, mentally rotate
yourself instead of drawing every turn.
If you are facing west and turn
left, you are now facing South.
With Aian triplets memorize common
sets like three to 4, 5, 5 to 1213.
To quickly solve shortest distance
problems for shadow logic.
First, identify the sun's position then.
Remember, shadows fall opposite the
sun to reduce the person's direction,
common mistakes and misconceptions.
Now let's look at common pitfalls
to avoid confusing left and right
turns is the most frequent error.
Always assume you are facing
the direction of movement.
Incorrectly applying Pythagoras theorem
Only apply it when a right angled triangle
forms and identify the perpendicular sides
correctly, ignoring the starting point.
Directions and distances are usually
relative to the starting point.
Miscalculating turns a turn is typically
90 degrees, two right turns mean facing
the opposite direction, not original.
Assuming straight lines.
Movements are usually
straight, but shortest.
Distance always is errors
in shadow problems.
Remember, sun's position and how
shadows fall relative to the person.
WH Framework summary.
Let's quickly summarize
with RWH framework.
So what is it?
It's a reasoning topic, testing
understanding of directions,
distances, and relative positions.
Why?
Is it important?
It's crucial for spatial reasoning,
problem solving and interpreting
geographical information.
When is it applied?
In scenarios involving navigation, mapping
and determining relative locations, where
is it used in daily life for travel,
academic reasoning tests and workplace
tasks requiring spatial awareness.
Who needs to know this?
Students, professionals in
logistics, urban planning, and anyone
needing to interpret spatial data.
How do we solve it?
By drawing diagrams, using coordinate
systems, and applying geometric
principles to track movements and
positions fully worked out examples,
time to put our knowledge into practice.
Example one.
Question.
A person walks three meters
towards the west, then turns
left and walks four meters.
What is the shortest distance and
direction of the person from the starting
point options A five meters northwest
B, five meters Southwest C seven meters
Southwest, D seven meters Northwest.
Understand the question before moving to.
Explanation
solution.
All right, let's visualize this.
The person starts,
walks three meters west.
From there, they turn left.
If you are facing west, a left
turn makes you face south.
They then walk four meters.
So from the start, they are three
meters west and four meters south,
which means the direction is southwest.
These movements form a right
angled triangle with sides three
and four meters using petagora.
The shortest distance is the high
use square root of three squared
plus four squared, which is square
root of nine plus 16 equals square
root of 25, which is five meters.
So five meters Southwest,
this matches option B.
Example two question.
Ram starts walking from
his home towards the north.
After walking 20 meters, he
turns right and walks 10 meters.
He then turns left and walks 10 meters.
Finally, he turns right
and walks five meters.
In which direction is he now facing?
Options.
A North D South C East D West understand
the question before moving to explanation
solution.
Let's track Ram's direction.
He starts facing north turns,
right, means facing East, turns
left from east means facing North.
Turns right from north
means facing east again.
So Ram is finally facing east.
This matches option C.
Example three question.
One morning after Sun Risi ish was
standing facing a pole, the shadow
of the pole fell exactly to his
right, to which direction was ish
facing options a North B South.
C East D West understand the
question before moving to explanation
solution.
This is a shadow problem.
One morning after sun, RISI means the
sun is in the east, therefore the shadow
of the pole falls towards the west.
The shadow fell to Ish's, right?
So Ish's right side is pointing West.
Right is West.
You must be facing north.
Thus was facing north.
This matches option A.
Thank you.
See you in the next session.